*Dec. 31*
## Relations

Intuitively, a relation is a way of "comparing" two elements
1. $<$, $>$, $=$, $\leq$, $\geq$, among numbers
2. $A=$ set of people, $B=$ set of cities
  - We can define a relation to hold between person $a\in A$ and city $b\in B$ if $a$ lives in $b$.
3. $A=$ set of people
  - We can define a relation to hold between person $a_1\in A$ and person $a_2\in A$ if they share a family connection.

Formal **Definition:** Let $A,B$ be sets. A **relation** $R$ from $A$ to $B$ is a subset of $A\times B$.

_Yeah, that's it. The relation doesn't have to be anything meaningful. It's just a subset of the Cartesian product of the two sets._

> [!example] Examples of Relations
>
> $A=\set{1,2}$, $B=\set{1, 2, 3}$
>
> 1. "less than" relation: $R=\set{(1,2), (1,3), (2,3)}$
> 2. "greater than" relation: $R=\set{(2,1), (3,1), (3,2)}$
> 3. "arbitrary" relation: $R=\set{(1,1), (1,3), (2,1)}$

A relation $R$ from $A$ to itself (i.e. $R\sseq A\times A$) is called a **relation on $A$**.

For example, see the third example in the intuitive definition above.

#### Simple Relations
- Empty relation: $R=\phi$
  - No pairs satisfy the relation
  - E.g, $R\in\N\times\N,\ (a,b)\in R$ iff $a=-b$
  - $R=\phi$ because there are no negative numbers in $\N$
- Complete relation: $R=A\times B$
  - Every pair satisfies the relation
  - E.g, $A=\set{1,2,3}$, $B=\set{4,5,6}$, $R=$ "less than"
  - $R=A\times B$ because every element of $A$ is less than every element of $B$

The ususal set operations can be applied to relations, e.g. union, intersection, complement, etc. since relations are just sets.

### Inverse Relations
**Definition:** Let $R$ be a relation from $A$ to $B$. The **inverse relation** of $R$ (denoted $R^{-1}$) is the relation from $B$ to $A$ defined by $R^{-1}=\set{(b,a)\mid(a,b)\in R}$.

> [!example] Examples of Inverse Relations
>
> $A=\set{1,2}$, $B=\set{1, 2, 3}$ $R=$ "less than" = $\set{(1,2), (1,3), (2,3)}$
>
> $R^{-1}=$ "greater than" = $\set{(2,1), (3,1), (3,2)}$
>
> Note that we just swapped the order of the elements in each pair.

### Composition of Relations
Suppose $R_1 \sseq A\times B$ and $R_2 \sseq B\times C$ are relations.

**Definition:** The **composition** of $R_1$ and $R_2$ (denoted $R_1\circ R_2$) is the relation from $A$ to $C$ defined by $R_1\circ R_2=\set{(a,c)\mid\exists b\in B\text{ s.t. }(a,b)\in R_1\text{ and }(b,c)\in R_2}$.

> [!tldr] Compositions explained in English
>
> A composition of relations $R_1$ and $R_2$ is a new relation $R_1\circ R_2$ that contains all pairs $(a,c)$ where there exists some $b$ such that $(a,\boldsymbol{b})\in R_1$ and $(\boldsymbol{b},c)\in R_2$.

> [!example] Examples of common composed relations
>
> $A,B,C$ are sets of people
> $R_1\sseq A\times B$ is relation "is a brother of" (i.e. $(a,b)\in R_1$ iff $a$ is a brother of $b$)
> $R_2\sseq B\times C$ is relation "is a parent of" (i.e. $(b,c)\in R_2$ iff $b$ is a parent of $c$)
>
> $R_1\circ R_2$ is relation "is an uncle of" (i.e. $(a,c)\in R_1\circ R_2$ iff $a$ is an uncle of $c$)

**Notation:** $R^2=R\circ R$, $R^3=R\circ R\circ R$, etc.

### Properties of Relations
- **Associative:** $(R_1\circ R_2)\circ R_3=R_1\circ(R_2\circ R_3)$

### Equivalence Relations
> [!error] Missing section
### Order Relations
#### Properties of Order Relations
An order relation generalizes the familiar “orders” like ≤ or ≥ on sets of numbers.
Formally, a relation $R$ on a set $A$ is an **order relation** if it has three properties:

1. $R$ is reflexive
2. $R$ is transitive
3. $R$ is antisymmetric
	- i.e., if $(a,b)\in R$ and $(b,a)\in R$, then $a=b$
	- $R$ cannot hold between different elements in both directions
	- Note that this is **not** the same as being asymmetric
	- Formally, $R$ is antisymmetric iff $R\cap R^{-1}\subseteq I_A$

If $R$ is an order relation, then we use the notation

$$a\leqslant_Rb$$

> [!example] Examples of order relations
> 
> 1. $\leq,\geq$ on sets of numbers
> 2. Lexicographic order of points on an $\R^n$ plane
> 	- Order by first point, if those are equal, order by the next point, etc…
> 3. Let $A$ be any set and define the relation $R$ on $\pset A$ by:
>    $A_1\ R\ A_2$ iff $A_1\sseq A_2$.
>  4.  Let $A=\N$.
>     Define $R$ on $A$ as: $(a,b)\in R$ if $a|b$ ($a$ divides $b$).

Note that examples 1 and 2 are “stronger” orderings. They are called **total orders** because $\forall a \in A$, $\exists b$ s.t. either $(a,b)\in R$ or $(b,a)\in R$.
Another way to say this is $\forall a \in A,\exists b$ s.t. $(a,b)\in R\cup R^{-1}$
Examples 3 and 4 are **partial orders** because there exist at least two elements in $A$ that cannot be compared with each other.

##### Hasse Diagrams
A partial order $R$ on a set $A$ can be illustrated using a **Hasse diagram**:

For example, $A={n|1≤n≤20}$, and $R$ is the divisibility relation (example 3 from above)

###### Property of HD
We can get from $a_1$ to $a_2$ by moving up edges iff then $a_1\leq_Ra_2$
###### Rules of HD
1. All **minimal elements** go on the bottom.
	- ($a_1 \in A$ is minimal if there does $\not\exists b\in A$ s.t. $b\leq_Ra$)
	- If there is a single minimum element $a$, then $a$ is called a minimum in $R$.
2. An edge exists from $a_1$ “goes up” to $a_2$ if:
	1. $a_1 \not= a_2$
	2. $a_1\leq_Ra_2$
	3. $\not\exists b\in A$ s.t. $a_1\leq_Rb$ and $b\leq_Ra_2$