### General Concepts
- What is probability?
	- It’s a measure of how likely *something* is to happen
#### Definitions
##### Experiments
An <u>experiment</u> is some occurance which can turn out in multiple ways

- Rolling dice
- Flipping coins
- Anything in a random manner
- Weather

##### Outcomes
An <u>outcome</u> is a discrete result of a given experiment.

##### Sample Spaces
The set of all possible outcomes is called the <u>sample space</u>, denoted as $\Omega$
- Eg., Rolling a die, $\Omega = \{1,2,3,4,5,6\}$
- Eg., Flipping a coin, $\Omega=\{H,T\}$
- Rolling 2 dice — more complicated, it depends what you want.
	- Sum of rolls: $\Omega=\{2,3,4,\dots,12\}$
	- Distinct results: $\Omega=\{(1,1),(1,2)\dots(1,6)\dots(6,6)\}$

##### Events
An <u>event</u> is a subset of $\Omega$
- It’s a set of possible outcomes.
	- Eg, rolling a single die < 6
		- $S=\{1,2,3,4,5\}$
- Other events:
	- $\Omega$
	- $\varnothing$
	- $\{a\}\mid a\in\Omega$  (single outcomes)
- A single outcome is a simple/elementary event
- The size of an event $A$ is denoted as $|A|$
- **Disjoint** events are events that **cannot** occur at the same time.
	- Events $A$ and $B$ are said to be disjoint *iff* $A\cap B=\varnothing$
	- A coin landing heads up is *disjoint* with a coin landing tails up.

##### Probability Functions
A <u>probability function</u> assigns a number $\in[0,1]$ to every event in $\Omega$.
$P(A)$ (*the probability of event A*) measures how likely the outcome is to be an element of $A$.
- In all cases, $P(\Omega)=1$, and $P(\varnothing)=0$

##### Uniform Sample Spaces
A <u>uniform sample space</u> (USS) is a sample space where each outcome is *equally likely*.
In a (finite) USS $S$:

$$P(S)=\frac{|S|}{|\Omega|}$$

> [!example] Evaluating Probabilities in a Uniform Sample Space
> 2 dice are rolled.
> Let $S$ be the event: Rolling $< 6$.
> What is $P(S)$?
> ---
> Using the “distinct results” definition of $\Omega$, we can calculate:
> 
> $$P(S)=\frac{|S|}{|\Omega|}=\frac{\text{number of outcomes in }S}{\text{number of outcomes in }\Omega}=\frac{10}{36}=\frac{5}{18}$$


##### Complementary Events
Two events are said to be complementary when one event occurs if and only if the other does not. The probabilities of two complimentary events add up to 1.

If $S_1,S_2$ are complimentary events, then:
- $|S_1|+|S_2|=|\Omega|$
- $P(S_1\cup S_2)=1$
- $P(S_1)+P(S_2)=1$

##### Probability Spaces
A <u>probability space</u> is a sample space $(\Omega)$ together with a probability function that satisfies 2 axioms:
1) $P(\Omega)=1$
2) If $A$ and $B$ are disjoint events (no overlap), then $P(A\cup B)=P(A)+P(B)$
> [!example] Example 1
>  $A=$ The high temp for today $\in [28^\circ, 33^\circ)$
>  $B=$ The high temp for today $\in [33^\circ, 38^\circ]$
>  
>  $A,B$ are *disjoint*, because there is no outcome that can be in both sets.
>  Suppose $P(A)=0.7$,  $P(B)=0.15$.
>  Then, $P(A\cup B)=0.7 + 0.15=0.85$

> [!example] Example 2
> $A=$ Pass the math exam
> $B=$ Pass the computers exam
> 
> $A,B$ are *not disjoint*, because an outcome can be in both $A$ and $B$. (Passing both exams)
> $P(A\cup B)$ is **not** $P(A)+P(B)$.

> [!example] Example 3
> A 6-sided die is rolled.
> $A=$ roll ≥ 2
> $B=$ roll ≥ 4
> 
> $A\subseteq B$ because every outcome in $B$ is also in $A$.
