##### Definition
Let $X$ be a random variable. Then, $E[X]=\sum_kk\cdot P_X(k)$
This is a <u>weighted average</u> of possible values of X, where the weight of each value is the possibility of X taking that value.


> [!example] Roll of a single die
> Let X= roll of a single die
> $E[X]=1\cdot\frac16+2\cdot\frac16+3\cdot\frac16+4\cdot\frac16+5\cdot\frac16+6\cdot\frac16=\frac72=3.5$

> [!example]  Tirgul 4 Question 5
> A pilot wants to insure his private plane worth 200,000 NIS. The insurance company estimates the probability of damage to the plane each year as follows:
> - 10% chance of a 50k NIS loss
> - 1% chance of a 100k NIS loss
> - 0.2% chance of a 200k NIS loss
> 
> If the insurance company wants an expected annual profit of 500 NIS from insuring this plane, what annual premium should it charge the pilot?
> 
> ---
> 
> Define $p=$annual premium. We wish to solve for this variable.
> Define $X=$ annual profit to company from pilot.
> We make our table as follows, assigning $k$ to be possible values of $X$: 
>
> $k$|$P_X(k)$
> -:|-
> $p$|$100\%-10\%-1\%-0.2\% = 88.8\%$
> $p-50,000$|0.1
> $p-100,000$|0.01
> $p-200,000$|0.02
> 
> $500=E[X]=(0.888)\cdot p+(0.1)(p-50,000)+(0.01)(p-100,000)+(0.002)(p-200,000)$
> 
> $$500=1\cdot p-6400\Rightarrow p=6900\text{ NIS}$$

<p style="text-align: center;">—Numerous examples omitted—</p>


> [!tldr] How to Solve Expected Value Questions
> *Assuming $X$ is the Random Variable*
> 1. Create a two column table, where the first column is labled $k$, and the second, $P_X(k)$.
> 2. Write each possible value for $X$ in the $k$ column, and the probability of $X$ taking that value in the $P_X(k)$ column.
> 3. Multiply each $k$ by it’s corresponding $P_X(k)$.
> 4. Sum up the products
> 
> The value obtained in step 4 is the Expected Value.


### Properties of Expected Values

1. $E[cX]=cE[X]$
2. $E[X+c]=E[X]+c$
3. $E[X+Y]=E[X]+E[Y]$
4. If $X,Y$ are independent, then $E[X\cdot Y]=E[X]\cdot E[Y]$
#### Linearity of Expectation
The first three properties are called linearity of expectation.
They can be expressed as:

$$E[aX+bY+c]=a\cdot E[X]+b\cdot E[Y]+c$$