##### Definition
A <u>distribution</u> is a generic type of probability function which depends on one or more parameters.

*Note: $\sim$ means “has the distribution”*
#### Uniform Distribution
$X\sim U(n)$
Possible values of $X$ are $\{1,…,n\}$ each with equal probability $\frac1n$
E.g., roll of a single fair die, $n=6$, you would say $X\sim U(6)$

If $X\sim U(n)$, what is $E[X]$ and $V(X)$? 

$$\begin{align}P_X(k)&=\frac1n\\E[X]&=\frac{n+1}2\\V(X)&=\frac{n^2-1}{12}\end{align}$$
(Derivations omitted, but easy to find online)

> [!example] Fair die roll
> Since it’s a fair die, we can say $X\sim U(6)$, and apply the above formula:
> $E[X]=\frac{6+1}2=3.5$
> $V[X]=\frac{6^2-1}{12}=\frac{35}{36}$
> 

### Binomial Distribution
$X\sim B(n, p)$
An experiment is repeated $n$ times, each time independent from the others. The probability of “success” each time is $p$.
Let $X=$ number of successes.

$$\begin{align}P_X(k)&={n\choose k}\cdot p^k\cdot(1-p)^{n-k}\\E[X]&=np\\V(X)&=np\cdot(1-p)\end{align}$$


> [!example] A die is rolled 8 times
> A success is rolling a 1 or 2.
> $X=$ number of rolls 1, 2 among the 8 rolls
> $X\in\{0,1,\dots,8\}$
> $X\sim B(8, \frac13)$

> [!example] Population is 20% left-handed
> A sample of 10 people are selected.
> X= number of lefties in the sample
> $X\sim B(10,\frac15)$
> ==Note==: In this example, we don’t have to worry about non-replacement. (You might say, since we’re not replacing the person we just sampled, the remaining others have an adjusted probability.) This is because the population is so large in relation to the sample size, non-replacement has a negligible impact.


### Geometric Distribution
$X\sim G(p)$
An experiment with probability $P\gt0$ of success is repeated (in independent trials) until the first success.

X= number of times experiment is performed, including first success.
X\in{}