Booth’s Algorithm is an efficient method for multiplying two binary numbers in 2’s Compliment Format. 
$$\newcommand{\code}[1]{\texttt{#1}}$$
> [!NOTE]
> There will be 3 ‘fields’ referred to: $A$, $B$, and product.
> A and B refer to the first and second multiplicands:
> When multiplying two numbers, it’s $A\times B$
> Product is our ‘working draft’ of what the result is.

Sign-extend the numbers to make sure they’re the same length. The product will be twice the amount of bits the operands take. **Make sure the numbers are signed!**
Write out $-B$ in 2’s Compliment. This will be useful later.

**Pro Tip:**
Keep your bits very orderly. Graph paper is advised, it will help reduce hand errors.

First, to set up the algorithm, prepare a table of sorts. The headers of the table should be: **Iteration**, **Product**, and **L**. The first row of the table should look like this (Assuming A and B are 4 bits):

Iteration |Step| Product | L | Description
-|-|-|-|-
0|0|`00000000`|`0`|Initialize

Then set the last 4 bits of the Product to equal the value in A.
For the rest of the algorithm, the next step is determined by the combination of the last bit of the Product, and the L bit.
The L bit is the bit that just got chopped off of the product. We’ll get to that soon.

Product | L | Action
-:|:-|-
0|0|Do Nothing
1|1|Do Nothing
0|1|Addition - Add B to the first half of the Product field. Discard carry-over
1|0|Subtraction - Add -B to the first half of the Product field
After each step, shift the product field right by one bit.
If your multiplicands are $n$ bits in length, you keep going until the end of the $n^{th}$ iteration.

I feel like the best way to continue is by example, with a TL;DR at the bottom:
Let $A=$ `0100`, Let $B=$ `0111`. $-B=$ `1001`

Iteration |Step| Product | L | Action Taken | Commentary
-|-|-:|:-|-|-
0|0|`00000100`|`0`|Initialize|The last four bits are equal to $A$
1|1.00|`00000100`|`0`|No action| The bits are `00`
1|2|`00000010`|`0`|Shift right one bit|
2|1.00|`00000010`|`0`|No action|The bits are `00`
2|2|`00000001`|`0`|Shift right one bit|
3|1.10|`10010001`|`0`|Add $-B$ to the right half of the product|The bits are `10`
3|2|`11001000`|`1`|Shift right one bit
4|1.01|`00111000`|`1`|Add $B$ to the right half of the product|The bits are `01`
4|2|`00011100`|`0`|Shift right one bit


TL;DR:
1. Make sure A and B are the same length (sign extending if needed), and signed.
	- Calculate -B in two’s compliment form
2. Set up the table. Keep track of your iteration number, your ‘step’, the Product field, and the leftover bit field. Set the 2nd half of the product field to A, and the first half to `0`.
3. Increment the iteration counter. If it’s greater than the number of bits in A or B, stop, go to step 7.
4. The last bit of the product joined with the leftover bit tell you what to do:
	1. If they’re the same (`00` or `11`), do nothing. Proceed to the next part.
	2. If it’s `01`, *add* B to the **first half** of the product field, discarding carry-over on the leading bit.
	3. If it’s `10`, *add* **-B** to the **first half** of the product field, ignoring ‘borrow’ on the leading bit.
5. Shift right one bit
6. Repeat steps 3-5
7. The result is the **Product** field. **==Do not include the leftover bit in your result!==**
	1. If you do, you’re dumb. More importantly, you’ll get the wrong answer. If you want to avoid either one of those two terrible fates, **Don’t include the leftover bit!**

