*June 5 Lecture. Links to the [board](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1iEPrIW_3tdyM6PEj864ZSCy3giiyGTL_/view?usp=sharing) and [recording](https://drive.google.com/file/d/16RVc0Qhm5KJTQPAcKlsWrlrtnZ2SH6Sq/view?usp=sharing).*
#### Introduction
**Definition:**
	An <u>indefinite integral</u> is the antiderivative of a function.
	I.e., given a function $f(x)$, can we find a function $F(x)$ such that $F^\prime(x)=f(x)$? $F(x)$ is called the antiderivative of $f$.
> [!example] Example of antiderivative
> $f(x)=x^2\implies F(x)=\frac{x^3}{3}$ *or* $\frac{x^3}{3}-17$ *or* $\frac{x^3}{3}+15$...
> In general, $F(x)=\frac{x^3}{3}+C\quad (C\in\R)$

**Notation:**
We use the symbolic notation:

$$\int{f(x)}\;dx=F(x)+C$$

$f(x)$ is called the <u>integrand</u>.


> [!tip] Basic Integrals — Very Important
> - $\int{\cos x}\;dx=\sin x+C$
> - $\int{\sin x}\;dx=-\cos x+C$
> - $\int{\tan x}\;dx=-\ln|\cos(x)|+C$
> - $\int{e^x}\;dx=e^x+C$
> - $\int{a^x}\;dx=\frac{a^x}{ln(a)}+C$
> - $\int{x^n}\;dx=\frac{x^{n+1}}{n+1}+C$
> 	- *For $n\not=-1$*
> - $\int{x^{-1}}\;dx=\int{\frac1x}\;dx=\ln{|x|}+C$
> - $\int{\frac1{1+x^2}}\;dx=\arctan x+C$
> - $\int{\frac1{\cos^2x}}\;dx=\tan x+C$
> - $\int{\frac{1}{\sin^2x}}\;dx=-\cot x+C$
> - $\int{k}\;dx=kx+C$
> - $\int{\ln x}\;dx=x\ln(x)-x$

#### Basic Properties
1. Suppose $\int f = F, \int g = G$.
	   $\int{\left[f(x)+g(x)\right]}\;dx=F(x)+G(x)+C$
	   The derivative of a sum is the sum of the derivatives. Therefore, the integral of a sum is equal to the sum of the integrals. Basically, this means you can split up the integral where there are terms being added or subtracted.
2. Suppose $\int f = F, k\in\R$.
	   $\int{(kf)(x)}\;dx=k\cdot\int{f(x)}\;dx=kF(x)+C$
	   The integral of a product of a constant and a function is the product of a constant and the integral of the function. Basically, this means you can pull constant coefficients outside of the integrand.
	   E.g, $\int{5x^3}\;dx=5\cdot\int{x^3}\;dx=5\cdot\frac{x^4}{4}+C=\frac{5x^4}{4}+C$
3. Combining properties 1 & 2, we get “linearity of the integral”:
	- $\int\big[af(x)+bg(x)\big]\;dx=aF(x)+bG(x)$

> [!example] Example: Exercise 6, Q1/1
>
> $$\begin{array}{l}\int{\left(2x^3+\frac3x\right)}\;dx	&=\int{2x^3}\;dx\;&+\;\int{\frac3x}\;dx\\	&=2\int{x^3}\;dx\;&+\;3\int{\frac1x}\;dx\\	&=2\cdot\frac{x^4}{4}+C&+\ 3\cdot\ln|x|+C\\	=\frac{x^4}{2}+3\ln|x|+C	\end{array}$$
>


#### Integration by Substitution
*Reversing the [[03. Differentiability and Derivatives#Chain Rule|Chain Rule]].*
**Rule:**
Suppose $F^\prime=f$. Then by the chain rule, ${[F(u(x))]}^\prime=f(u(x))\cdot u^\prime(x)$. When we reverse the process, $\int{f(u(x))\cdot u^\prime(x)}\;dx=F(u(x))+C$
Therefore, we deduce the following rule:

$$\int{\Big[f\big(u(x)\big)\cdot u^\prime(x)\Big]}\;dx=F\big(u(x)\big)+C$$

The key is to identify one factor of the integrand as the derivative of another part of the integrand; this other part will be your $u^\prime(x)$.
Another way to say that is to find a composed function $(f\circ g)(x)$ within the integrand such that $g^\prime(x)$ is being multiplied by the composed function

> [!example] Example of Reversing the Chain Rule
> $$\int{\underbrace{3\sin^2x}_{\textcolor{blue}{f\big(\textcolor{orange}{u(x)}\big)}}}\ \underbrace{\cos x}_{\textcolor{green}{u^\prime(x)}}\;dx=\underbrace{\sin^3x}_{\textcolor{red}{F\big(\textcolor{orange}{u(x)}\big)}}+C$$
>
> Where,
> - The composed function is $\textcolor{blue}{3}\textcolor{orange}\sin\textcolor{blue}{^2}\textcolor{orange}x$
> - $\textcolor{red}{F(x)}=x^3$
> - $\textcolor{blue}{f(x)}=F^\prime(x)=3x^2$
> - $\textcolor{orange}{u(x)}=\sin x$

We use substitution to make this method technically easier:

##### Substitution
Denote $u^\prime(x)dx$ as $du$, and write $f\big(u(x)\big)$ as $f(u)$.
I.e., remove $x$ from the integral entirely, rewrite it as an integral in the variable $u$.

$$\int \underbrace{f(u(x))}_{f(u)}\ \underbrace{u^\prime(x)\;dx}_{du}=\int f(u)\;du=F(u)+C=F\big(u(x)\big)+C$$

> [!example] Example of Using Substitution $\int{3\sin^2x\cos x}\;dx$
> $$\int{3\sin^2x\cos x}\;dx=\int{3u^2}\;du$$
>
> Where,
> - We substitute $u(x)=\sin x$,
>   which gives us $u^\prime(x)\;dx=\cos x\;dx$
>
> - Solve the simplified integral:
>
> $$\int{3u^2}\;du=u^3+C$$
>
>- Replace the substitution:
>
> $$u^3+C=\sin^3x+C$$

---
*June 5 Tirgul. Links to the [board](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1jC-3rBP83pOaEgS5oz5vi6MZnezAzosC/view?usp=sharing) and the [recording](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1JBBuIsRiHkG3wy1CRoGwrHAyBRweepv7/view?usp=sharing).*
The key is to find the appropriate $u(x)$, see above rule.

> [!important] General Rule
>
> $$\int{\frac{1}{x^2+a}}dx=\frac{1}{\sqrt a}\arctan\left(\frac x{\sqrt a}\right)$$

> [!info] Useful Trigonometric Identities
>
> $$\begin{aligned}
>	\sin(x)\sin(y)&=\frac{\cos(y-x)-\cos(y+x)}2\\
>	\cos(x)\cos(y)&=\frac{\cos(y-x)+\cos(y+x)}2\\
>	\sin(x)\cos(y)&=\frac{\sin(y+x)-\sin(y-x)}2\\
>	\cos(x)\sin(x)&=\frac{\sin(2x)}2
>	\\
>	\sin^2(x)&=\frac{1-\cos(2x)}2=1-\cos^2x\\
>	\cos^2(x)&=\frac{1+\cos(2x)}2=1-\sin^2x\\
> \end{aligned}$$

#### Integration by Parts
*Reversing the [[03. Differentiability and Derivatives#Rules of Differentiation|Product Rule]]*
Recall the Product Rule:
${(f\cdot g)}^\prime=f\cdot g^\prime+f^\prime\cdot g$
Moving things around, we get this:
$f\cdot g^\prime={(f\cdot g)}^\prime-f^\prime\cdot g$
Integrating both sides gives us this rule:

$$\int{u\cdot v^\prime}\;dx=uv-\int{u^\prime\cdot v}\;dx$$

This is helpful when the integrand can be expressed as $u\cdot v^\prime$, where $u^\prime\cdot v$ is easier to integrate.
**Picking an appropriate  $u$ and $v^\prime$:**
$u$ should become simpler - or at least, not more complicated when differentiating.
$v^\prime$ should become simpler - or at least, not more complicated when integrating.
Generally, but not always, you usually want to avoid having an exponential function as $v^\prime$.
Specifically: $x^n$ should be $u$, not $v^\prime$.
> [!example] Example of Integration by Parts: $\int{xe^x}\;dx$
> Given $\int{xe^x}\;dx$.
> We want to express $xe^x$ as $u\cdot v^\prime$, so we choose $u=x$, and $v^\prime=e^x$.
>
>
> $u=x$|$v=e^x$
> -|-
> $u^\prime=1$|$v^\prime=e^x$
>
> Applying the above formula, we get:
>
> $$xe^x-\int{e^x}\;dx=xe^x=e^x+C$$


---
*June 7 Lecture. Links to the [board](https://drive.google.com/file/d/15gbbPNCTEbTvbXksbwLN3ELwxw4Qgcgx/view?usp=sharing) and the [recording](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1de2CqRi_kW-lfg4d7KYnV5lTyedULo3c/view?usp=sharing).*
#### Algebraic Methods for Integrating a Rational Function
$$\int\frac{P(x)}{Q(x)}\;dx$$

First, let’s look at simple rationals that don’t need any special methods:
> [!example] Simple example: $\int{\frac{x+4}{x^2+7}}\;dx$
> Break up $\frac{x+4}{x^2+7}$:
>
> $$\frac{x+4}{x^2+7}=\frac{x}{x^2+7}+\frac{4}{x^2+7}$$
>
> Therefore,
>
> $$\int{\frac{x+4}{x^2+7}}\;dx=\int{\frac{x}{x^2+7}}\;dx+\int{\frac{4}{x^2+7}}\;dx$$
>

> [!example] Simple example: $\int{\frac{x+x^3}{x^4+2x^2}}\;dx$
> Notice that the derivative of the denominator is $4x^3+4x=4(x+x^3)$, which is $4$ times the numerator.
>
> $$\int{\frac{x+x^3}{x^4+2x^2}}\;dx=\frac14\int{\frac{4(x+x^3)}{x^4+2x^2}}\;dx$$
>
> Substitute $u=x^4+2x^2,\; du=4(x+x^3)dx$
>
> $$\frac14\int{\frac{du}{u}}=\frac14\ln|u|+C$$
>
> Un-substitute
>
> $$\frac14\ln|u|+C=\frac14\ln|x^4+2x^2|+C=\frac14\ln(x^4+2x^2)+C$$
>

> [!summary] Simple: When it works, just do it.
> The last two examples are “easy” methods when they work:
> - Split the integrand into the sum of two ‘easier’ ones
> - Notice that the numerator is a derivative (or multiple thereof) of the denominator
>
> However, it won’t always be so easy.

Cases where it’s not so simple:
- The degree of the numerator is equal to or larger than the degree of the denominator
- The denominator is a quadratic equation

**deg P ≥ deg Q**
When the numerator has a higher or equal degree than the denominator, first actually do the division:
> [!example] Not-So-Simple Example $\int\frac{x^4}{x^2+4}$
> First divide: $\frac{x^4}{x^2+4}=x^2-4+\frac{16}{x^2+4}$
>Then integrate:
>
> $$\int{x^2-4+\frac{16}{x^2+4}}\;dx=\int{x^2}\;dx-\int4\;dx+16\int{\frac{1}{x^2+4}}\;dx$$
>
>These are now simple integrals that we know how to solve.

> [!example] Not-So-Simple Example $\int{\frac{3x-4}{x^2+2x+5}}\;dx$
> We “complete the square” in the denominator, so we get the form $\int\frac{3x+4}{(x+a)^2+b}$
> $x^2+2x+5=(x^2+2x+1)+4=(x+1)^2+4$
> Substitute $u=x+1\;du=1dx$
> $x=u-1\implies3x-4=3(u-1)-4=3u-7$
>
> $$\int{\frac{3x-4}{x^2+2x+5}}\;dx=\int{\frac{3u-7}{u^2+4}}\;du$$
>
> > **Summary of method**:
> > Complete the square in the denominator to change it from $x^2+ax+b$ to $u^2+c$
> > This **only** works if the denominator $Q(x)>0$ for all $x$ — i.e., it doesn’t break down into factors. When this condition is not met, we use Decomposition (see below).

##### Decomposition into Partial Fractions
A rational function of the form $\frac{Ax+B}{(Cx+D)(Mx+N)}$ can be broken down as $\frac P{Cx+D}+\frac Q{Mx+N}$, where the degrees of the numerators are less than that of the denominators.
If the numerator has a degree of 0 or 1, the denominator has a degree of 2.
> [!example]
>
> $$\frac{20}{(2x+1)(x-2)}=\frac{P(x-2)}{2x+1}+\frac{Q(2x-1)}{(x-2)}=\frac{(P+2Q)x+(-2P+Q)}{(2x+1)(x-2)}$$
>
> Therefore, $(P+2Q)x+(-2P+Q)=20$
> Comparing coefficients across numerators, we get:
>
> $$\begin{aligned}P+2Q&=0\\-2P+Q&=20\end{aligned}$$
>
> Solving for $P$ and $Q$, we get $Q=4,\;P=-8$. Plugging them into our desired form:
>
> $$\frac{20}{(2x+1)(x-2)}=\frac{-8}{2x+1}+\frac{4}{x-2}$$
>
> The integrals of the summands are much easier to calculate.

If the denominator has more than two factors:
>  $\frac{Ax+B}{(Cx+D)(Mx+N)(Sx+T)}=\frac P{Cx+D}+\frac Q{Mx+N}+\frac R{Sx+T}$

In each summand, the numerator can be of degree *up to* one less than that of the denominator. ${(\text{deg}(numerator)≤\text{deg}(denominator)-1)}$. If the denominator is an irreducible polynomial of degree 2, set the numerator as degree 1. ($Ax+B$)