### Important Terms
- CPU: Central Processing Unit — Contains the ALU
	- I really hope this isn’t news to you
- Clock Rate (CR)— The rate at which the CPU internal clock runs. It is measured in cycles per second (Hz).
- Clock Cycle (CC) — The length of a single cycle. This is the inverse of the clock rate.
	- $CC=\frac1{\text{Clock Rate}}$
	- CC is usually measured in microseconds ($1\times10^{-6}$ seconds), but sometimes milliseconds ($\times10^{-3}$) or nanoseconds ($\times10^{-9}$)
- Instruction Count — The number of instructions in a given program
- Cycles Per Instruction — The number of clock cycles required to perform the entire program divided by the instruction count.
	- Basically, average cycle per instruction
- CPI<sub>i</sub> — The number of cycles required to perform an [[01. Instruction Types#I-Type|I-Type]] instruction.
	- Cycles Per Instruction<sub>of type I</sub>
- CPU Time (Execution Time) — The number of seconds it takes for the processor to execute a given program
	- CPU Time = Clock Cycle $\times$ Cycles per Instruction $\times$ Instruction Count
- I<sub>i</sub> — The number of I-Type instructions in the program
- CPI — Not sure about this one, I’ll get back to it. it’s probably super important though.
- MIPs — Million Instructions per Second
	- Measures roughly how many instructions can be executed in one second
	- $\frac{\text{Instruction Count}}{\text{CPU TIME in seconds}\times10^6}$
- MFLOPs — Million Floating Point OPerations
	- $\frac{\text{Number of FP Ops in program}}{\text{CPU TIME in seconds}\times10^6}$

### Parallelization
In order to calculate the *speedup* — how much faster the program can be — when parallelized, we employ this formula:

$$\text{Speedup}=\frac{1}{B+\frac{1-B}{N}}$$

Where $B$ is the percentage of the program that can be parallelized, and $N$ is the number of concurrent parallelizations.

### General Speedup (Amdahl’s Law)
To calculate the new execution time of a program after modifying the speeds of some of the commands, we apply this scary lookin’ formula:

$$\text{Time}_\text{new}=\text{Time}_\text{old}\times\left[(1-F)+\frac {F}{\text{Speedup}}\right]$$

Where $F$ is the **F**raction of the program that can be made **F**aster, and Speedup is exactly how much faster that part is made to be.

Overall speedup factor is $\frac{1}{\text{Time}_\text{new}}$ (Normalized old execution time to 1)