
### Separable Equations
**Definition:** Separable Equation
> An ODE is separable if it has the form $y\p=f(y)\cdot g(x)$

> [!example] Example of a Separable Equation
>
> $$\begin{aligned}y\p&=\frac{xy}{1+y}\\y\p&=x\cdot\frac y{1+y}\\f(y)&=\frac y{1+y} &g(x)=x\end{aligned}$$
>

#### How to solve Separable Equations
1. Get the Equilibrium Solution:
	- $y=k$ where $k$ is any root of $f$ (i.e., $f(k)=0$)
2. Divide by f(y):
	- $\frac{y\p}{f(y)}=g(x)$
3. Integrate both sides:
	- (using the trick from the end of last page):
	   $\int \frac1{f(y)}dy = \int g(x)dx$
4. Solve for $y$

### Linear 1st-Order Equations
**Definition:** Linear Equation
> An ODE is linear if it has the form $y\p+a(x)\cdot y=g(x)$

> [!example] Example of a Linear Equation
>
> $$\begin{aligned}y\p+2xy&=x^2\\a(x)&=2x &g(x)&=x^2\end{aligned}$$
>

#### How to solve Linear Equations
To solve a Linear Equation, we use an "Integration Factor". It's common to see the notation $\mu(x)$ for the Integration Factor, but we don't use that notation.

Given a Linear Equation $y\p+a(x)\cdot y=g(x)$:
1. Compute the Integration Factor:
	- Let $A(x)$ be an _antiderivative_ of $a(x)$, i.e., $A\p(x)=a(x)$.
	- The Integration Factor is $\mu(x)=e^{A(x)}$
2. Multiply the equation by the Integration Factor:
    -  $e^{A(x)}\cdot (y\p+a(x)\cdot y)=e^{A(x)}\cdot g(x)$
3. Integrate both sides:
	- $\int e^{A(x)}\cdot (y\p+a(x)\cdot y)dx=\int e^{A(x)}\cdot g(x)dx$
	- Due to the awesome properties of the Integration Factor, the left side is just $e^{A(x)}\cdot y$. Easy peasy!
	- The right side is standard integration.
4. Solve for $y$:
    - Divide by the Integration Factor to get $y$ by itself.

### Homogeneous Equations
**Definition:** Homogeneous Equation
> An ODE is homogeneous if it can be written in the form $y' = f\left(\frac{y}{x}\right)$, where $f$ is a homogeneous function of $x$ and $y$.
>
> Alternatively, $f(x, y)$ is homogeneous if it can be expressed as a function of the single variable $z = \frac{y}{x}$.

A function $f(x, y)$ is called homogeneous of degree $n$ if for any non-zero constant $k$,

$$f(kx, ky) = k^n f(x, y)$$

> [!example] Example of a Homogeneous Function
>
> $$f(x, y) = \frac{y^3}{x^3}$$
>
> Verifying homogeneity:
>
> $$f(kx, ky) = \frac{(ky)^3}{(kx)^3} = \frac{k^3 y^3}{k^3 x^3} = \frac{y^3}{x^3} = f(x, y)$$


> [!example] Example of a Homogeneous Function
>
> $$f(x, y) = \frac{y^2 + 5xy}{10xy + x^2}$$
>
> Verifying homogeneity:
> 
> $$f(kx, ky) = \frac{(ky)^2 + 5(kx)(ky)}{10(kx)(ky) + (kx)^2} = \frac{k^2 y^2 + 5k^2 xy}{10k^2 xy + k^2 x^2} = \frac{k^2 (y^2 + 5xy)}{k^2 (10xy + x^2)} = \frac{y^2 + 5xy}{10xy + x^2} = f(x, y)$$
> 


> [!example] Example of expressing a Homogeneous Function in terms of $z$
> $$f(x, y) = \frac{y^2 + 5xy}{10xy + x^2}$$
>
> Expressing in terms of $z$:
>
> $$f(x, y) = \frac{y^2 + 5xy}{10xy + x^2} \cdot \frac{\frac{1}{x^2}}{\frac{1}{x^2}} = \frac{\left( \frac{y}{x} \right)^2 + 5 \left( \frac{y}{x} \right)}{10 \left( \frac{y}{x} \right) + 1} = \frac{z^2 + 5z}{10z + 1}=f(z)$$

> [!tip] Spotting a Homogeneous Equation
> An equation is homogeneous if all terms in the equation are of the same degree.

#### How to Solve a Homogeneous ODE
1. Substitute $z=\frac yx$:
	- $y=zy$
	- $y'=z'x+z$
2. Rewrite the ODE:
	- $z'x+z=f(z)$
	- $z'=\frac{f(z)-z}{x}$
	- $z'=(f(z)-z)\cdot\frac{1}{x}$
- Solve for $z$ as a [[02. Standard ODEs#Separable Equations|Separable Equation]]
- Unsubstitute $\frac yx = z$
- Multiply both sizes by $x$ to solve for $y$.

> [!example] Solving a Homogeneous ODE
>
> $$y'=\frac{3y^2-x^2}{2xy}\textcolor{green}{\cdot \frac{{1}/{x^2}}{{1}/{x^2}}}=\frac{3z^2-1}{2z}$$
>
> Let $z=\frac yx\Rightarrow y=zx\Rightarrow y'=z'x+z$
> Rewrite ODE in terms of $z$:
>
> $$z'x+z=\frac{3z^2-1}{2z}$$
>
> Isolate $z$:
>
> $$z'=\frac1x\left(\frac{3z^2-1}{2z}-z\right)=\frac1x\left(\frac{z^2-1}{2z}\right)$$
>
> Equilibrium Solutions: $(z^2-1)=0\Rightarrow z=\pm1\Rightarrow\frac yx=\pm1\Rightarrow y=\pm x$
>
> Separate sides and integrate:
>
> $$\frac{2z}{z^2-1}\cdot z'=\frac1x\Rightarrow\int\frac{2z}{z^2-1}dz=\int\frac1xdx$$
> 
> Solve integral:
>
> $$\ln|z^2-1|=\ln|x|+C\Rightarrow z^2=1+Cx\Rightarrow z=\pm\sqrt{1+Cx}$$
> 
> Unsubstitute $z=\frac yx$:
>
> $$\frac yx=\pm\sqrt{1+Cx}\Rightarrow y=\pm x\sqrt{1+Cx}$$
> 

### Bernoulli Equations
**Definition:** Bernoulli Equation
> A Bernoulli Equation is an ODE that can be written in the form $y' +a(x)\cdot y=b(x)\cdot y^\alpha$
>
> Note: If $\alpha=0,1$ then this is a regular [[02. Standard ODEs#Linear 1st-Order Equations|linear equation]].

#### How to solve Bernoulli Equations
1. Divide both sides by $y^\alpha$:
	- $y'y^{-\alpha}+a(x)\cdot y^{1-\alpha}=b(x)$
2. Substitue $z=y^{1-\alpha}$
	- $y'y^{-\alpha}=\frac{z'}{1-\alpha}$
3. Equation now has the form $\frac{z'}{1-\alpha}+a(x)\cdot z=b(x)$
	- $z'+(1-\alpha)a(x)\cdot z=b(x)$
4. This is a [[02. Standard ODEs#Linear 1st-Order Equations|linear equation]] in terms of $z$, solve using integration factor as usual.
5. Solve for $y$ using the relation $z=y^{1-\alpha}$

### Existence and Uniqueness Theorem
Often, we cannot find a solution as a “neat formula” to an IVP. However, we’d at least like to know:
1. Does the IVP have some solution?
2. If so, is it the only one?

> [!quote] Existence and Uniqueness Theorem for First Order ODEs
> Given the IVP $\cases{y'=f(x,y)\\ y(x_0)=y_0}$:
> If there exists a rectangle $D=\left\{(x,y):\ \begin{align}\alpha<&x<\beta\\\gamma<&y<\delta\end{align}\right\}$ containing the point $(x_0, y_0)$ in which:
> 1. $f(x, y)$ is continuous
> 2. The partial derivative $f_y$ is continuous
> 
> Then there exists an interval containing $x_0$ in which the IVP has a unique solution.


#### Partial Derivative fy
$f_y$ is the derivative of $f$ by treating $x$ as if it were a constant.

> [!example] Example of taking a Partial Derivative
> 
> Suppose $f(x,y)=x^2y-3xy^2+\frac{5x}{y} +4\sin x$.
> $f_y=x^2-6xy-\frac{5x}{y^2}$
